Mentioning people, and I'll start with
mentioning people in the planning department
that have made some contributions over the years.
And I'll just, currently Mike O'Neill is the head
of current planning at the planning department.
And Mike worked a lot on the land use plan and many of
the changes in the land use regulations San
Antonio has received some credit for,
particularly dealing with issues of affordable
housing and other things. So he's certainly
someone that has and is making a contribution
today. Oh,
I'm bad at names.
Well. Wendell Davis, who is no longer with the
planning department, and he's got his own firm,
Wendell Davis and Associates, and also a firm
called Essay Research, both in San Antonio, was
kind of the principal planner during the period of
the chapter four and all of that era, and worked on a
lot of it, and didn't necessarily support some of
the things that the planning department was doing
and probably be a good person to talk to about many
of the things that went on. He also worked closely
with, during this period of time, the city was
attempting to get some feel for the cost of growth,
because that was also an issue. So Gruen and Gruen
and Newport Economic Group and others were
retained as consultants. And many of those
studies I think are significant in terms of the
evolution of the planning department itself.
God, thinking back, it's hard to remember all
those people over the years and what they
Probably the way to do this systematically is the
biography or the bibliography I gave you has got
most of the documents listed. We'd really have to
go in and look at who were the, because most of those
documents list the staff and who was the key staff
person involved in some of those things. As I
mentioned, Stromberg earlier is one of the main
people behind the whole gross sketch and gross
study. Drumber moved on to Colorado. Yeah, last I
knew he was in some city suburb of Denver, but that
was a number of years ago. I don't know where
he ended up. Yeah, well I do want to make sure that
the principal and senior planners who made
impacts on city planning in the various cities of
Texas, as well as just the planning directors and
mayors.
Now, considering the whole panorama of planning
in San Antonio, what do you consider to be the five
or so major planning events in San Antonio's
history?
Well,
I'm not sure that these would classify as events.
Well, if you're looking at it in an objective sort
of way, I'd have to say that the Bartholomew plan
its adoption was certainly significant.
Obviously, extremely significant was the
adoption of the charter with that very strong
pro-planning Article 9, which is probably as
strong a mandate as any city has in Texas, given the
fact that state statute is silent. I think the
splitting of the Planning and Zoning Commission
in 1976 to really start the whole movement toward a
plan was also a significant event. I think the
adoption of the basic plan which not the event
itself in August of 1980 as much as what it
represented in the community and that was that the
community over a period of three or four years had
turned around from a position where there was a lot
of disagreement about the legitimacy of a city
doing planning to more recently almost near
unanimity about the role of a city in dealing with
growth and development through a plan. I think
when you see a new chairman of the Greater San
Antonio Chamber of Commerce take office and one of
his opening statements is, you know, pro-City of
San Antonio doing planning, you know things have
really started turning around. the adoption of
the Basic Plan kind of symbolized that type of
thing. Another event I think is just the
appointment of Ed Davis as Director of Planning
and his influence, although even today it may be
hard to judge what that influence actually is, but
I do think that that represented a substantial
change in terms of the professional staff and
professionalism in city planning in San Antonio.
So those are some things that I think are
significant. Has state government had any
appreciable impact on planning in San Antonio?
Well, only in terms of events, not in terms of... of
providing technical assistance or providing
specific legislative abilities. What I mean by
events are things like, and I'm sure Kathy Powell
talked with you about this, but the whole aquifer
controversy. that in San Antonio basically
focused on the period about 1975 through 1979. And
the state had a role in that basically because of
the Texas Water Quality Board and all that. And we
see the state dealing with events as opposed to
anything else in plain in San Antonio. And then, of
course, the location of the university campus.
But
see, most of San Antonio's planning, since we
lacked a plan until relatively recently, has been
a reactive type of thing. You know, there have been
major controversies, and it's not just, you know,
everything from urban renewal controversies
with the San Antonio new town in town, in the early
1970s, to things like the aquifer in the mid-70s,
to San Antonio Ranch Newtown, and they just go on
and on and on, and still to a certain extent go on
over specific projects. Well, and then of course
one would have to ask the state's impact on
planning in San Antonio regarding the location of
freeways.
Well, except that most of the... Well, I guess I'd
say two things. A, is that the freeway thing has
been a positive impact overall. And B, is that
lately, the last decade or two, it's been a
cooperative effort. In other words, the state has
not come in and said, here's the way it's going to
be. In fact, I think at San Antonio our expressway
system is as good, and I think better, than any that
exists in the state of Texas, and probably as good
as any in the country. And that came about because
of cooperation, not the state mandating that this
is the way it's going to be. And that's evidenced by
some of the things that are going on with
expressways now in San Antonio. Now, even the
state is not in the role as the initiator. It's the
local community. You would say that the history of
freeway location has largely been a cooperative
effort in San Antonio. I think it has, and I think
that obviously there are problems. I mean, you
know, roads were located that created problems in
terms of certain specific neighborhoods. But in
the era of the urban expressway in this country, I
challenge anyone to name a city in which that
didn't occur. The overall system,
where it's located and how it functions today I
think is good. And I think that the community has
resisted, and there are examples of this, has
resisted expressways. In other words, not every
expressway that was proposed got built. There
were big controversies over the Bandera
Expressway. There were major controversies over
the Macalester Expressway. So I mean, it's not
like they haven't been controversial. In fact,
the Macalester Expressway is an indication of 20
or 25 years classic example of a controversy. But
there, the controversy was not necessarily the
state against the city. But it was various
factions in the city fighting over it. I think the
state
role is a positive role.
What are the main administrative procedures and
planning program elements that San Antonio has
for implementing community plans? You've
already mentioned, of course, the usual.
subdivision review and so on. And basically
that's what they are. I mean, you've got the
traditional mechanisms of San Antonio, zoning,
subdivision, capital improvements, codes, and
then a lot of projects. I think the San Antonio has
been on the cutting edge in terms of working
cooperatively with the private sector to get
things done. We see For example, downtown San
Antonio, which was a high priority and has been in
most of the plans, its rejuvenation was due
largely to the city's leadership and cooperation
with the private sector. San Antonio has also, I
think, largely been on the cutting edge in looking
at new mechanisms. You know, talk about historic
districts or talk about airport military airport
zoning or talk about tax assessment districts or
tax increment financing or all these types of
things San Antonio has I think at least in Texas
been on the cutting edge of either using those
mechanisms or being the one that really pushed the
state to allow cities to get them and then they're
using them once the state has got them it's also
worked very cooperatively with the federal
government to get things done, the creation of the
San Antonio Missions National Historic Park, the
protection of the military airport in San
Antonio, a lot of flood control projects, and the
cooperative things between the city of San
Antonio, the San Antonio River Authority, and the
Army Corps of Engineers. So I think San Antonio's
gone a long way beyond the traditional
mechanisms. And these administrative
procedures are certainly not all within the
planning department. Oh, no. In fact, when it
comes to plan implementation, a lot of that occurs
outside the planning department. And in fact,
see, the other thing you've got to realize is that
it's only relatively recently that even the
common planning implementing mechanisms have
been within the planning department. For a long
time, zoning was not a function that the planning
department dealt with. That was in a separate
department of the city. I recall that was that way,
and Lila Conkroll was concerned about that
relationship. Yeah. So actually, for a long time,
we really had two planning departments, in
essence. We had a planning department, and let me
just say that that these came about because of the
politics of the bureaucracy, as well as some
structural problems. One of the reasons,
well let me just back up and say that for a long time
we had two planning departments, one that dealt
with long range planning, and then one that
basically could be characterized as current
planning, where zoning and all of those types of
things would be. And they didn't really even get
along with each other very well. Were they housed
in the same office? Not even the same building.
They had different directors.
Okay. We've talked a lot about San Antonio and its
planning. That's the topic. Now we have come to the
point that San Antonio has a mayor who has a degree
in planning. And as such,
has this made a difference in San Antonio? Or if
not, do you think it might in the future? And in what
way is Henry Cisneros' mayorship going to be
significantly different than anyone else's?
Well, I'm not sure it's made a difference. Let me
say that I guess Henry had the opportunities that
Hartman had to initiate and be very supportive of
the planning function in San Antonio. And I think
that his overall record is one of cautious and
Well, cautious support, but it's also
characterized by periods where frequently he'll
just ignore the planning function. Henry is the
type of person that's much more oriented to
projects and getting things done as opposed to the
long-range planning type of effort that we're
talking about. And he was not the one that was
responsible for the mid-'70s planning
initiative, although he was supportive of it.
More recently, his Target 90 effort is an example
of something that, although one could attribute
that to his planning education, that we need
goals, The whole thing was done totally outside of
and largely ignored the established planning
function. What he did was ended up almost going
back to turn of the century planning in the United
States and appointing a massive 500 person
private citizen committee to come up with Now,
there were many beneficial things about that
process, but I'm not sure that in terms of typical
planning, that that's such a good idea. Because
you have in place, I mean, it wasn't that the city
didn't have goals. The city's got goals coming out
the kazoo. It's just that this was a separate type
of effort, and it remains to be seen whether the
target 90 ongoing process actually accomplishes
anything since frequently it's operating
outside the planning structure that the city has
established. And that's characteristic of how
Henry is operating. He knows planning, but he's
not interested in long-range stuff. He's
interested in getting stuff done, the project
stuff. Well, some people would argue that the
institutionalized planning process of local
government is outside the realm of the
decision-making process. I would agree. I'm even
questioning the need for it.
We've had two other examples of goals, projects
for major Texas cities, one in Corpus Christi and
another in Dallas. Well, don't forget Austin. And
Austin had one as a basis for their Austin Tomorrow
plan, so-called. And then, of course, the state of
Texas as well. And
what has come of these goals programs is variable.
The one in Corpus Christi was an excellent
program. Unfortunately, it came to very little in
their case. Do you have a copy of the book? Yes. The
goals for Texas, I think the fallout from that, I'm
sorry, the goals for Dallas are going to be longer
coming because of the politics of the Dallas
situation. But we'll have to see Marvin
Springer's writings. about that now. And the
goals for Texas, we know what happened to that.
And Austin is mixed. It's mixed. And they have yet
to produce a full-blown plan. All they have now
is... Well, but their whole attitude has changed
in terms of growth. It really has. And they have yet
to produce... Which is exactly what happened in
San Antonio. San Antonio's attitude changed
about growth. I was going to say, Austin has yet to
produce a full-blown plan. They have the makings
of a plan, but it's not a complete plan. All it is is a
word plan filled with goals and objectives and
policy statements. And that was unsatisfactory
for the council. Well, but I'll also argue is that
is that the definition of what constitutes a plan
or what works as a plan is changing. And I'm not sure
that... See, San Antonio doesn't have a picture
plan. And I'm not sure that, you know... In many
cases, a community can find a policies plan that
works just as well. I would argue that. Well, I know
you would. I'm just saying that's the reality of
many communities today. Well, they're planning
that that reality doesn't work in the case of
Austin. It's a good example. Well, I don't think
you can attribute that in Austin to the plan itself
as much as you can attribute it to some incredible
changes in terms of the politics. Just like San
Antonio, the political and the social and the
economic environment of that community has
changed so much. and their attitudes about the
role of local government and their ideas of growth
have just changed. And in Austin's case, they're
still going through some evolutionary things.
Like today, it'll be interesting to see in Austin
what happens with some elections, because
there's some very clear-cut council races in
Austin that revolve on those basic issues that
have been around since Friedman's day.
I
have a question here regarding the use of
consultants. What has been the role of private
planning consultants in San Antonio's various
planning programs? Well, over the years, in
addition to assistance on the major planning
efforts, San Antonio has used literally probably
hundreds of consultants on specific types of
planning projects.
SOM worked with the city on the major River
Corridor Study, the award-winning study. The
cities have used consultants more recently like
Metcalf and Eddy out of Boston to work on the
aquifer study. It's used Gruen and Gruen out of
California on its economic analysis. It's used
Ross Hardies, O'Keeffe, Babcock, and Parsons out
of Chicago, the big land use law firm, to work on the
city's development code. So there literally have
been countless examples of consultants dealing
with the city, both in terms of specific projects
where it's designed, as well as development codes
and things like that. And San Antonio doesn't
hesitate to bring in. More recently it was using
Lane Kendig who wrote the book on performance
zoning to come in and do some things. So, you know,
San Antonio has constantly used planning
consultants. Not so much the firm to come in and do a
plan as much as firms that have a particular
expertise in the law or in zoning or in economics or
in something else to come in and work with the
planning department staff on a specific project
or a plan element.